you know YouTube and filmmaking are two
completely different things but you
learn a little bit about the filmmakers
art as you're making videos here on
YouTube and this is in effect take two
of the video I did the first take I was
fresh out of the gym I felt great I
thought this is gonna go great film
that's sitting on a park bench with the
natural sunlight pouring down on me no
no no natural what didn't work out at
all not only did the coloring look
terrible the lighting looked terrible
but the whole time I kind of kind of
splitting ideas and just kind of a
little bit puffy and squinting up and
stuff so that's what you learn bit by
terrible awful bit anyway yeah I was
yeah it was fresh out the gym and
feeling myself and I was sitting in
front of a vegan restaurant too but
obviously I need I need a crew of
interns to make outdoor filming that
type possible all right on to the only
moderately depressing topic of this
video look I want to talk about regret
and I want to talk about being open
about regret and you know I feel like
this is the last big taboo in the
english-speaking world in the 21st
century in what sense to it what's that
so I mean it's taboo with my microphone
over here ah look we live in a culture
that like accepts you and embraces you
if if you say that you regret you know
that you were born a man instead of a
woman I mean like the actor towards
transsexuals we live in a culture that's
so positive so encouraging about drug
use and drug addiction and being an
ex-alcoholic and you know committing
unspeakable atrocities and more whatever
like oh well that's when you were young
you know you've moved on
is there any [ __ ] empire in the
history of the world that had less
interest in in taking its own war
criminals to court than the American
Empire
um yes the British Empire the British
Empire was even less interested in any
kind of accountability like yo you
tortured some people to bet death in
Vietnam but nothing we can do about that
now
it's going on still today anybody who
committed atrocities in Iraq and
Afghanistan one of the good things is
they'll talk about it openly because
those guys although there's no chance of
any kind of accountability no Chet
nobody who did anything wrong in 2008
financial
whatever not into not into personal
accountability culture we live in a
culture that's so warm and receptive to
regret about gender and sexuality and
drugs and alcohol but it seems to me it
is in denial
it's not accept you know it's it's quite
taboo to talk about regret of matters of
real substance so most obvious one here
is education so look this is not a
problem with 100% of white Western
English speaking people but it's a
problem with the majority people I deal
with and I deal with unusual kinds of
people I deal with people with very most
of them of very high level of education
a lot of people I talk to of F phd's I
deal with my own family who are some
very peculiar people I deal with people
who are vegan activists and you know
whatever it's not a cross-section
population but this reluctance to even
let the word regret come out of your
mouth I really noticed it all the time
and I may be a little bit extra
sensitive the issue because of what my
father's own own attitude was so my
father he virtually created his own
religion of refusing to regret
everything of wanting to believe that
everything in his life and everything in
my life everything in life was some kind
of positive progress and positive growth
I do think many of you will just am I
saying that you were [ __ ] you've known
people with that kind of attitude
whether or not it quite reached such a
religious fervor as you did with my
father now I think my father was in some
ways warped by the positive
encouragement he had as a young man look
guys let's keep it a little real you can
have both you have people who are warped
psychologically because they received so
much negative attention or
discouragement right they were told
growing up you can never do this you're
never gonna be good enough you're never
gonna be smart enough that Kanwar people
sure it can warp your outlook on life
and it can influence your behavior
negatively but some people get warped by
encouragement some people get warped by
being told again and again you know
you're beautiful you're wonderful you're
brilliant you're the best you're the
best in your class you're the best in
the school you're so talented you don't
need to work hard
you need to worry everything's gonna be
great you're gonna be a success and
stereotypically in white western
english-speaking culture I do talk to a
lot of kind of good-looking blondes
good-lookin females who really had that
problem and what makes it all the more
tragic is those women may not be stupid
they may be intelligent they may be
talented but they're not as intelligent
as they think they are and they're not
talented in the ways they suppose they
are because they've only had this kind
of positive encouragement and they
haven't had someone in a down-to-earth
way say to them look you're already
failing this class at this level
maybe you shouldn't press on to the next
class the next level maybe you gotta
reconsider and re-strategize where your
talents lie what you're good at
what you're willing to work hard at
where you're gonna put in the effort
maybe this career path isn't for you or
this educational path is a few maybe
something else is maybe there's
something else you can excel at or maybe
you just need to re-examine what you're
doing so that you can excel so in the
same way my father um I really think he
had some of the same psychological
disadvantages as someone who grew up as
a stereotypical good-looking blonde in
this culture I mentioned to my
girlfriend the other day I once saw an
interview with a Czech woman a woman
from the Czech Republic and she had
worked as a model and an actress but she
also had a university degree in
something boring like chemistry so not
hating on chemistry but you know I mean
some some real said and she said and you
could tell her you could feel her
seething disapproval she said it was not
until I came to the United States of
America that I had even heard of this
idea that a beautiful woman didn't need
to do anything else in her life other
than be a beautiful woman she said where
I came from if you're a beautiful woman
that's good but you still got to work
hard you still got a study hard you
still got to prove yourself you know you
still got to earn the respect to your
peers you still gotta work hard to have
a career or distinction something
somewhere now I don't know that's that
that memory of mine that's been more
than 20 years ago I think that I saw
that interview it may be that the Czech
Republic has changed a lot of things
have changed in central your up since
then I've been to the Czech Republic
beautiful country terrible climate
alright moving on
in some ways my father had those defects
and I would suspect you know some of my
viewers may know that also my father
situation was not that he was
good-looking but that he grew up in a
disadvantaged household and he was
actively perceived as being
disadvantaged but all of his teachers
and professors he was getting all this
positive encouragement he was the
working class hero stereotype came from
a steel mill town everybody around him
worked in a steel factory his own mother
worked in a steel factory when his
mother remarried he got married to a
second guy that guy was also an employee
of the the steel mills steel factory and
you know his parents had had divorced
when he was an infant kind of thing and
you know so he was a single child of
being raised by a single mother factory
worker in a steel town so all he ever
heard growing up was that he was a
working-class hero that he was good
enough and smart enough and brilliant
and and what-have-you and really briefly
he was gifted with a very good memory
for me it's a funny story it may not be
funny to you but I mean the way he got
by in the education system was just by
memorizing things and this covered up
some really serious lapses in what
talent and what kind of intellectual
ability he had didn't have a lot of
examination based math education is
really just testing your ability to
memorize things and the ultimate example
of this was that he took a course that
he had no interest in and he told me he
took this course only to try to raise
his grade his grade average to get into
a better you know ph.d program
ultimately MA program PhD from get a
better scholarship he to of course he
found completely boring and
uninteresting on geology the science of
rocks and with no interest he just sat
down and memorized the textbook and he
got the highest grade on that exam that
anyone had ever gotten in the the
records of the the school and the
professor was so astounded he asked my
father if he'd be willing to change
majors and switch into that
my work now my fathertold this with of
course a guffaw and a laugh to him it
was the most ridiculous thing to imagine
that he would have quit being in
philosophy and gone into geology maybe
his whole life would have been better if
he had that's your aptitude is just
memorizing and recursion maybe could
have had a great career as a geologist
Canada is a country with a lot of mining
you probably could have had a great
career even organizing labor unions
since y'all because that was his
communist fantasy he wasn't he was an
extreme left winger he was not just a
moderate communist he was a communist
extremist probably could've been real
happy organizing miners unions and a
better life so that's that's kind of
another story but he hit his limit in
terms of his ability to scrape by just
memorizing and regurgitating things on
exams that all came to a screeching halt
when he got an all-expenses-paid
scholarship to go to Harvard University
Harvard School of world religion to
learn Sanskrit and with the best
professors in the world the textbooks
all the encouragement in the world in
what may have been the best university
at least the best university in America
or maybe even the best university in the
world for studying and teaching Sanskrit
at that time Harvard School of
divinities at its zenith of Fame at that
time especially in Sanskrit um he could
not do it he could not he could not do
the verb paradigms he could not do the
basics of of learning Sanskrit and he
dropped out did he spend the rest of his
life regretting this no instead he
convinced himself he created this new
religion this new belief system that he
didn't regret anything that nothing was
to be regretted that he would go around
all the time telling everyone fiercely
how proud he was that he had no regrets
in life that somehow his life is just
one long succession of victories and how
all these experiences just made him who
he is and who he is a supposedly a
wonderful human being which he really
wasn't when my father first fell in love
with my mother with the woman who became
my mother he had a famous dinner party
where he met my mom's parents
the first time and he told them then I
mean I only heard this story as he told
it I can only imagine how much more
embarrassing and awful the situation
wasn't real life he told them then
probably at the inner tilt that he had
no regrets in life it he felt a man
ought to live his life with no with no
regrets and no remorse and that that's
how he was at that time my father
already had seven children born to him
by several different ways and he was
looking at marrying my mother to have
child number 8 and child number 9 that's
me you know hashtag no regrets that's
life and I think I think my mother's
parents my maternal grandparents
probably regarded him as psychotic from
what I get from the story the reaction
was was pretty now remember you know I
remember my grandparents that side they
we're not they're not no see
self-effacing people thought you know I
think I think dinner I think dinner was
ruined
you should regret hey wait look look
look look look look my philosophy is the
the diametric opposite extreme I think
all of you can probably imagine the ways
in which this is a kind of sick sad self
justification of my father's party I'm
very upfront with people about my
regrets what they are why I have them
what I want to learn from them moving on
and how I don't encourage other people
to make the same mistakes I made I'm
really upfront really honest people no
regrets
especially when I'm talking to
professor's colleagues I often state it
in a very emotionally neutral
inexpressive way like yeah I regret that
I came here and majored in Chinese I
regret that I study Chinese I regret
that I ever started learning the Chinese
language this has been a disaster that's
been a failure you know I regret it but
that alone
even my stating it in a completely dry
neutral factual way a lot of people have
the same reaction my father did again my
father is a little bit weird or a little
bit of extreme example this but I'm kind
of seeing and again how widespread his
attitude is in white Western culture and
they're there to size it
one is just okay one is the difference
we regret in admitting that you regret
something is just saying oh no you
mustn't admit that right but the second
is I think this deeper feeling although
still relatively shallow is deeper
feeling that these experiences even
these mistakes have made you who you are
so you ought not to regret anything
because if you regret something or if
you admit that you regret something
especially something the substantive
this deep these types of experiences
that have changed you are that have made
you who you are what you are admitting
directly or indirectly
is that that you regret becoming the man
you now are and for me that's not
daunting at all I think in having that
conversation
you're exactly committing to the level
of honesty of regretting that you've
become the man who you are because I
agree it does run that deep the decision
to learn Cambodian and move to Cambodia
changed me I became a different person
and in some ways a better person but not
all I mean I'm not I'm not into lunch on
that I'm not kidding myself
the decision to learn lotion decision to
study Korean a jib way all the different
decisions I made in terms of my
education language career yeah it
changed me it made me who I am and I can
openly say now I'm 40 years old and I'm
looking at it the next 20 years of my
life where I'm making the transition
from 40 years old to 60 and it's
deplorable I've put myself in a terrible
position a lot of it is not my fault a
lot of it has to do with the education
system in Canada and circumstances way
beyond my control in places like
Cambodia and Laos whatever I regret that
I ever studied Chinese that I ever
studied Japanese that I ever studied
lotion Cambodian poly Cree a jib way I
regret all of it and I'm burdened with
the awareness that my intellectual
potential
even my political potential might
potentially contribute positively to
politics whether at City Hall or
Parliament or as a vegan activist or as
an activist on some other set of issues
I care about like prison reform any
given war the armbar we always have a
good selection of Wars to be an activist
not in 21st century or you know the
struggles of indigenous peoples in
Canada groups like the Korean Ajay way
whatever it is that I've lost all of
that I've lost each and every
opportunity to do something meaningful
to make a pause the difference in the
world because of those decisions I made
even though I made those decisions with
the best of intentions and with exactly
these positive aspirations and now I've
got nothing and going nowhere and I'm
really willing to say I regret that I
regret what I tried to do what I did and
sure I even regret you know what what
it's made me you sure put optimistic
ending on this know you know you know
there's that old canard of wanting to
believe that we're living in the best of
all possible worlds was that live Nets
yeah I think it was live nets and not
Spinoza who said that you know trying to
convince yourself that things would have
been even worse if you taken some other
path I'm just not I'm just not stupid
enough to tell myself that and I'm now
at a stage in my life where in terms of
what I can do with my mental powers my
intellectual competence and ability I'd
be in a better position today if I
joined the army and I don't just mean if
I joined the army at 18 if I joined the
army at 18 25 28 38
at any given point then I believe me I
don't
by military service as someone who
studies political science I have a
pretty accurate idea of just how
miserable and depressing that would be
but the compromises I have made and the
sacrifices I have made to acquire the
learning that I have sure it's it's left
me with with nothing and no hope for my
own future none so look if you're not
willing to say that if you're not
willing to look in the mirror and and
and regret you know who you are and
those decisions and what it's what it's
made you into then I think this kind of
conversation can only be a kind of sham
can only be a kind of Act and that was
what those conversations have Mallen to
do every time I discussed it with my
father whether I was whatever back in my
20s or the discussions we had not so
long before he died
all you would ever get out of this guy
was this performance this sham this this
act and I think that's the same act he
tried to do for my you know my maternal
grandparents or my my mother's parents
which is just to try to play the part of
this man who who has no regrets and
instead what you are is is a man who has
regrets and doesn't want to admit it to
himself or doesn't want to admit it to
the to the outside world so moving
forward I can say you know I don't have
the answers but I have the honesty to
admit to myself that I at least have
these questions and that's what regret
is it's a question of couldn't I have
done better couldn't I have beens that's
the worst it could have been worse what
is that supposed to be it could have
been worse
[Music]
right right right right right right
right that's that's of my professors
professor priestly it was a professor
Buddhism and never went to Asia I knew
another professor that a Cambridge yes
yes I would have rather join the army I
would have rather done anything any of
the plausible options rather than a
nobleman if I had learned to play the
drums in Toronto and been in a band
there would have a better reward for
then there has been for the
extraordinary life I've lived I made the
wrong choice at every stage I regret it
all and I can't even play the drums and
I can't knit a sweater and I can't drive
a car you know those are sacrifices
about learned pal I did all these
astoria things along stuff itself I mean
I think it's interesting your way of
phrasing it at first was in terms of the
educational content like at least you
learned at least you've learned from
experience it's true I've learned but it
when you say it could have been worse
but the reality is if I had put the same
level of effort and energy that I put
into Palli
that's just one language poly as an
ancient language into anything else
I would have learned more with better
outcomes including even ancient Greek or
Latin by the way it would have been
incredibly easy for me to learn ancient
Greek compared to pally alright and I
would now have somewhere I could go and
get a PhD and move forward with that
right so I mean as easy as I say it
could have been worse yeah well guess
what and every single one of those
stages I can look at that and say it
could have been better even at the stage
you know this where I was learning
Japanese which was a terrible to learn
Japanese over a short period of time
well I could have been learning French
as useless as that sounds that still
would have been better at any one of
these stages it's real easy to see what
would have been better I couldn't learn
Russian I could learn Farsi I could
learn it the Persian or Iranian language
or what I call it sure right so this
I think anyway she means well my
girlfriend but it's a false
encouragement to say it it could have
been worse the nature of regret is
exactly facing up to the fact that it
could have been better that is that is
really an ineluctable regret